pypy/doc/getting-started-python.rst, before:

==============================================
Getting Started with PyPy's Python Interpreter
==============================================

.. contents::


PyPy's Python interpreter is a very compliant Python
interpreter implemented in Python.  When translated to C, it passes most of 
`CPythons core language regression tests`_ and comes with many of the extension
modules included in the standard library including ``ctypes``. It can run large
libraries such as Django_ and Twisted_. There are some small behavioral
differences with CPython and some missing extensions, for details see `CPython
differences`_.

.. _Django: http://djangoproject.com
.. _Twisted: http://twistedmatrix.com

.. _`CPython differences`: cpython_differences.html

To actually use PyPy's Python interpreter, the first thing you typically do is
translate it to get a reasonably performing interpreter. This is described in
the next section. If you just want to play around a bit, you can also try
untranslated `py.py interpreter`_ (which is extremely slow, but still fast
enough for tiny examples).

Translating the PyPy Python interpreter
---------------------------------------

(**Note**: for some hints on how to translate the Python interpreter under
Windows, see the `windows document`_)

.. _`windows document`: windows.html

You can translate the whole of PyPy's Python interpreter to low level C code,
`CLI code`_, or `JVM code`_.

1. Install build-time dependencies.  On a Debian box these are::

     [user@debian-box ~]$ sudo apt-get install \
     gcc make python-dev libffi-dev pkg-config \
     libz-dev libbz2-dev libncurses-dev libexpat1-dev \
     libssl-dev libgc-dev python-sphinx python-greenlet

   On a Fedora box these are::

     [user@fedora-or-rh-box ~]$ sudo yum install \
     gcc make python-devel libffi-devel pkg-config \
     zlib-devel bzip2-devel ncurses-devel expat-devel \
     openssl-devel gc-devel python-sphinx python-greenlet

   The above command lines are split with continuation characters, giving the necessary dependencies first, then the optional ones.

   * ``pkg-config`` (to help us locate libffi files)
   * ``libz-dev`` (for the optional ``zlib`` module)
   * ``libbz2-dev`` (for the optional ``bz2`` module)
   * ``libncurses-dev`` (for the optional ``_minimal_curses`` module)
   * ``libexpat1-dev`` (for the optional ``pyexpat`` module)
   * ``libssl-dev`` (for the optional ``_ssl`` module)
   * ``libgc-dev`` (for the Boehm garbage collector: only needed when translating with `--opt=0, 1` or `size`)
   * ``python-sphinx`` (for the optional documentation build.  You need version 1.0.7 or later)
   * ``python-greenlet`` (for the optional stackless support in interpreted mode/testing)

2. Translation is somewhat time-consuming (30 min to
   over one hour) and RAM-hungry.  If you have less than 1.5 GB of
   RAM (or a slow machine) you might want to pick the
   `optimization level`_ `1` in the next step.  A level of
   `2` or `3` or `jit` gives much better results, though.

   Let me stress this another time: at ``--opt=1`` you get the Boehm
   GC, which is here mostly for historical and for testing reasons.
   You really do not want to pick it.  The resulting ``pypy-c`` is
   slow.

3. Run::

     cd pypy/translator/goal
     python translate.py --opt=jit targetpypystandalone.py

   possibly replacing ``--opt=jit`` with another `optimization level`_
   of your choice like ``--opt=2`` if you do not want the included JIT
   compiler.  As of March 2011, Intel 32-bit environment needs **at
   least** 2GB, and 64-bit needs 4GB.

.. _`optimization level`: config/opt.html

If everything works correctly this will create an executable
``pypy-c`` in the current directory.  Type ``pypy-c --help``
to see the options it supports - mainly the same basic
options as CPython.  In addition, ``pypy-c --info`` prints the
translation options that where used to produce this particular
executable. The executable behaves mostly like a normal Python interpreter::

    $ ./pypy-c
    Python 2.5.2 (64177, Apr 16 2009, 16:33:13)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``this sentence is false''
    >>>> 46 - 4
    42
    >>>> from test import pystone
    >>>> pystone.main()
    Pystone(1.1) time for 50000 passes = 2.57
    This machine benchmarks at 19455.3 pystones/second
    >>>>

This executable can be moved around or copied on other machines; see
Installation_ below.  For now a JIT-enabled ``pypy-c`` always produces
debugging output to stderr when it exits, unless translated with
``--jit-debug=off``.

The ``translate.py`` script takes a very large number of options controlling
what to translate and how.  See ``translate.py -h``. Some of the more
interesting options (but for now incompatible with the JIT) are:

   * ``--stackless``: this produces a pypy-c that includes features
     inspired by `Stackless Python <http://www.stackless.com>`__.

   * ``--gc=boehm|ref|marknsweep|semispace|generation|hybrid``:
     choose between using
     the `Boehm-Demers-Weiser garbage collector`_, our reference
     counting implementation or four of own collector implementations
     (the default depends on the optimization level).

Find a more detailed description of the various options in our `configuration
sections`_.

.. _`configuration sections`: config/index.html

.. _`translate PyPy with the thunk object space`:

Translating with non-standard options
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

It is possible to have non-standard features enabled for translation,
but they are not really tested any more.  Look for example at the
`objspace proxies`_ document.

.. _`objspace proxies`: objspace-proxies.html

.. _`CLI code`: 

Translating using the CLI backend
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To create a standalone .NET executable using the `CLI backend`_::

    ./translate.py --backend=cli targetpypystandalone.py

The executable and all its dependencies will be stored in the
./pypy-cli-data directory. To run pypy.NET, you can run
./pypy-cli-data/main.exe. If you are using Linux or Mac, you can use
the convenience ./pypy-cli script::

    $ ./pypy-cli
    Python 2.5.2 (64219, Apr 17 2009, 13:54:38)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``distopian and utopian chairs''
    >>>> 

Moreover, at the moment it's not possible to do the full translation
using only the tools provided by the Microsoft .NET SDK, since
``ilasm`` crashes when trying to assemble the pypy-cli code due to its
size.  Microsoft .NET SDK 2.0.50727.42 is affected by this bug; other
version could be affected as well: if you find a version of the SDK
that works, please tell us.

Windows users that want to compile their own pypy-cli can install
Mono_: if a Mono installation is detected the translation toolchain
will automatically use its ``ilasm2`` tool to assemble the
executables.

To try out the experimental .NET integration, check the documentation of the
clr_ module.

.. _`JVM code`: 

Translating using the JVM backend
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To create a standalone JVM executable::

    ./translate.py --backend=jvm targetpypystandalone.py

This will create a jar file ``pypy-jvm.jar`` as well as a convenience
script ``pypy-jvm`` for executing it.  To try it out, simply run
``./pypy-jvm``::

    $ ./pypy-jvm 
    Python 2.5.2 (64214, Apr 17 2009, 08:11:23)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on darwin
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``# assert did not crash''
    >>>> 

Alternatively, you can run it using ``java -jar pypy-jvm.jar``. At the moment
the executable does not provide any interesting features, like integration with
Java.

Installation
++++++++++++

A prebuilt ``pypy-c`` can be installed in a standard location like
``/usr/local/bin``, although some details of this process are still in
flux.  It can also be copied to other machines as long as their system
is "similar enough": some details of the system on which the translation
occurred might be hard-coded in the executable.

For installation purposes, note that the executable needs to be able to
find its version of the Python standard library in the following three
directories: ``lib-python/2.5.2``, ``lib-python/modified-2.5.2`` and
``lib_pypy``.  They are located by "looking around" starting from the
directory in which the executable resides.  The current logic is to try
to find a ``PREFIX`` from which the directories
``PREFIX/lib-python/2.5.2`` and ``PREFIX/lib-python/modified.2.5.2`` and
``PREFIX/lib_pypy`` can all be found.  The prefixes that are tried are::

    .
    ./lib/pypy1.2
    ..
    ../lib/pypy1.2
    ../..
    ../../lib/pypy-1.2
    ../../..
    etc.

If the executable fails to find suitable libraries, it will report
``debug: WARNING: library path not found, using compiled-in sys.path``
and then attempt to continue normally.  If the default path is usable,
most code will be fine.  However, the ``sys.prefix`` will be unset
and some existing libraries assume that this is never the case.

In order to use ``distutils`` or ``setuptools`` a directory ``PREFIX/site-packages`` needs to be created. Here's an example session setting up and using ``easy_install``::

    $ cd PREFIX
    $ mkdir site-packages
    $ curl -sO http://peak.telecommunity.com/dist/ez_setup.py
    $ bin/pypy-c ez_setup.py
    ...
    $ bin/easy_install WebOb
    $ bin/pypy-c           
    Python 2.5.2 (64714, Apr 27 2009, 08:16:13)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``PyPy doesn't have copolyvariadic dependently-monomorphed hyperfluxads''
    >>>> import webob
    >>>>               

.. _`py.py interpreter`:

Running the Python Interpreter Without Translation
---------------------------------------------------

The py.py interpreter
+++++++++++++++++++++

To start interpreting Python with PyPy, install a C compiler that is
supported by distutils and use Python 2.4 or greater to run PyPy::

    cd pypy
    python bin/py.py

After a few seconds (remember: this is running on top of CPython), 
you should be at the PyPy prompt, which is the same as the Python 
prompt, but with an extra ">".

Now you are ready to start running Python code.  Most Python
modules should work if they don't involve CPython extension 
modules.  **This is slow, and most C modules are not present by
default even if they are standard!**  Here is an example of
determining PyPy's performance in pystones:: 

    >>>> from test import pystone 
    >>>> pystone.main(10)

The parameter is the number of loops to run through the test. The
default is 50000, which is far too many to run in a non-translated
PyPy version (i.e. when PyPy's interpreter itself is being interpreted 
by CPython).

py.py options
+++++++++++++

To list the PyPy interpreter command line options, type::

    cd pypy
    python bin/py.py --help

py.py supports most of the options that CPython supports too (in addition to a
large amount of options that can be used to customize py.py).
As an example of using PyPy from the command line, you could type::

    python py.py -c "from test import pystone; pystone.main(10)"

Alternatively, as with regular Python, you can simply give a
script name on the command line::

    python py.py ../../lib-python/2.5.2/test/pystone.py 10

See our  `configuration sections`_ for details about what all the commandline
options do.


.. _Mono: http://www.mono-project.com/Main_Page
.. _`CLI backend`: cli-backend.html
.. _`Boehm-Demers-Weiser garbage collector`: http://www.hpl.hp.com/personal/Hans_Boehm/gc/
.. _clr: clr-module.html
.. _`CPythons core language regression tests`: http://codespeak.net:8099/summary?category=applevel&branch=%3Ctrunk%3E

.. include:: _ref.txt

Commit message:

Add minimark here too.
--HG--
branch : documentation-cleanup

pypy/doc/getting-started-python.rst, after:

==============================================
Getting Started with PyPy's Python Interpreter
==============================================

.. contents::


PyPy's Python interpreter is a very compliant Python
interpreter implemented in Python.  When translated to C, it passes most of 
`CPythons core language regression tests`_ and comes with many of the extension
modules included in the standard library including ``ctypes``. It can run large
libraries such as Django_ and Twisted_. There are some small behavioral
differences with CPython and some missing extensions, for details see `CPython
differences`_.

.. _Django: http://djangoproject.com
.. _Twisted: http://twistedmatrix.com

.. _`CPython differences`: cpython_differences.html

To actually use PyPy's Python interpreter, the first thing you typically do is
translate it to get a reasonably performing interpreter. This is described in
the next section. If you just want to play around a bit, you can also try
untranslated `py.py interpreter`_ (which is extremely slow, but still fast
enough for tiny examples).

Translating the PyPy Python interpreter
---------------------------------------

(**Note**: for some hints on how to translate the Python interpreter under
Windows, see the `windows document`_)

.. _`windows document`: windows.html

You can translate the whole of PyPy's Python interpreter to low level C code,
`CLI code`_, or `JVM code`_.

1. Install build-time dependencies.  On a Debian box these are::

     [user@debian-box ~]$ sudo apt-get install \
     gcc make python-dev libffi-dev pkg-config \
     libz-dev libbz2-dev libncurses-dev libexpat1-dev \
     libssl-dev libgc-dev python-sphinx python-greenlet

   On a Fedora box these are::

     [user@fedora-or-rh-box ~]$ sudo yum install \
     gcc make python-devel libffi-devel pkg-config \
     zlib-devel bzip2-devel ncurses-devel expat-devel \
     openssl-devel gc-devel python-sphinx python-greenlet

   The above command lines are split with continuation characters, giving the necessary dependencies first, then the optional ones.

   * ``pkg-config`` (to help us locate libffi files)
   * ``libz-dev`` (for the optional ``zlib`` module)
   * ``libbz2-dev`` (for the optional ``bz2`` module)
   * ``libncurses-dev`` (for the optional ``_minimal_curses`` module)
   * ``libexpat1-dev`` (for the optional ``pyexpat`` module)
   * ``libssl-dev`` (for the optional ``_ssl`` module)
   * ``libgc-dev`` (for the Boehm garbage collector: only needed when translating with `--opt=0, 1` or `size`)
   * ``python-sphinx`` (for the optional documentation build.  You need version 1.0.7 or later)
   * ``python-greenlet`` (for the optional stackless support in interpreted mode/testing)

2. Translation is somewhat time-consuming (30 min to
   over one hour) and RAM-hungry.  If you have less than 1.5 GB of
   RAM (or a slow machine) you might want to pick the
   `optimization level`_ `1` in the next step.  A level of
   `2` or `3` or `jit` gives much better results, though.

   Let me stress this another time: at ``--opt=1`` you get the Boehm
   GC, which is here mostly for historical and for testing reasons.
   You really do not want to pick it.  The resulting ``pypy-c`` is
   slow.

3. Run::

     cd pypy/translator/goal
     python translate.py --opt=jit targetpypystandalone.py

   possibly replacing ``--opt=jit`` with another `optimization level`_
   of your choice like ``--opt=2`` if you do not want the included JIT
   compiler.  As of March 2011, Intel 32-bit environment needs **at
   least** 2GB, and 64-bit needs 4GB.

.. _`optimization level`: config/opt.html

If everything works correctly this will create an executable
``pypy-c`` in the current directory.  Type ``pypy-c --help``
to see the options it supports - mainly the same basic
options as CPython.  In addition, ``pypy-c --info`` prints the
translation options that where used to produce this particular
executable. The executable behaves mostly like a normal Python interpreter::

    $ ./pypy-c
    Python 2.5.2 (64177, Apr 16 2009, 16:33:13)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``this sentence is false''
    >>>> 46 - 4
    42
    >>>> from test import pystone
    >>>> pystone.main()
    Pystone(1.1) time for 50000 passes = 2.57
    This machine benchmarks at 19455.3 pystones/second
    >>>>

This executable can be moved around or copied on other machines; see
Installation_ below.  For now a JIT-enabled ``pypy-c`` always produces
debugging output to stderr when it exits, unless translated with
``--jit-debug=off``.

The ``translate.py`` script takes a very large number of options controlling
what to translate and how.  See ``translate.py -h``. Some of the more
interesting options (but for now incompatible with the JIT) are:

   * ``--stackless``: this produces a pypy-c that includes features
     inspired by `Stackless Python <http://www.stackless.com>`__.

   * ``--gc=boehm|ref|marknsweep|semispace|generation|hybrid|minimark``:
     choose between using
     the `Boehm-Demers-Weiser garbage collector`_, our reference
     counting implementation or one of own collector implementations
     (the default depends on the optimization level but is usually
     ``minimark``).

Find a more detailed description of the various options in our `configuration
sections`_.

.. _`configuration sections`: config/index.html

.. _`translate PyPy with the thunk object space`:

Translating with non-standard options
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

It is possible to have non-standard features enabled for translation,
but they are not really tested any more.  Look for example at the
`objspace proxies`_ document.

.. _`objspace proxies`: objspace-proxies.html

.. _`CLI code`: 

Translating using the CLI backend
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To create a standalone .NET executable using the `CLI backend`_::

    ./translate.py --backend=cli targetpypystandalone.py

The executable and all its dependencies will be stored in the
./pypy-cli-data directory. To run pypy.NET, you can run
./pypy-cli-data/main.exe. If you are using Linux or Mac, you can use
the convenience ./pypy-cli script::

    $ ./pypy-cli
    Python 2.5.2 (64219, Apr 17 2009, 13:54:38)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``distopian and utopian chairs''
    >>>> 

Moreover, at the moment it's not possible to do the full translation
using only the tools provided by the Microsoft .NET SDK, since
``ilasm`` crashes when trying to assemble the pypy-cli code due to its
size.  Microsoft .NET SDK 2.0.50727.42 is affected by this bug; other
version could be affected as well: if you find a version of the SDK
that works, please tell us.

Windows users that want to compile their own pypy-cli can install
Mono_: if a Mono installation is detected the translation toolchain
will automatically use its ``ilasm2`` tool to assemble the
executables.

To try out the experimental .NET integration, check the documentation of the
clr_ module.

.. _`JVM code`: 

Translating using the JVM backend
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To create a standalone JVM executable::

    ./translate.py --backend=jvm targetpypystandalone.py

This will create a jar file ``pypy-jvm.jar`` as well as a convenience
script ``pypy-jvm`` for executing it.  To try it out, simply run
``./pypy-jvm``::

    $ ./pypy-jvm 
    Python 2.5.2 (64214, Apr 17 2009, 08:11:23)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on darwin
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``# assert did not crash''
    >>>> 

Alternatively, you can run it using ``java -jar pypy-jvm.jar``. At the moment
the executable does not provide any interesting features, like integration with
Java.

Installation
++++++++++++

A prebuilt ``pypy-c`` can be installed in a standard location like
``/usr/local/bin``, although some details of this process are still in
flux.  It can also be copied to other machines as long as their system
is "similar enough": some details of the system on which the translation
occurred might be hard-coded in the executable.

For installation purposes, note that the executable needs to be able to
find its version of the Python standard library in the following three
directories: ``lib-python/2.5.2``, ``lib-python/modified-2.5.2`` and
``lib_pypy``.  They are located by "looking around" starting from the
directory in which the executable resides.  The current logic is to try
to find a ``PREFIX`` from which the directories
``PREFIX/lib-python/2.5.2`` and ``PREFIX/lib-python/modified.2.5.2`` and
``PREFIX/lib_pypy`` can all be found.  The prefixes that are tried are::

    .
    ./lib/pypy1.2
    ..
    ../lib/pypy1.2
    ../..
    ../../lib/pypy-1.2
    ../../..
    etc.

If the executable fails to find suitable libraries, it will report
``debug: WARNING: library path not found, using compiled-in sys.path``
and then attempt to continue normally.  If the default path is usable,
most code will be fine.  However, the ``sys.prefix`` will be unset
and some existing libraries assume that this is never the case.

In order to use ``distutils`` or ``setuptools`` a directory ``PREFIX/site-packages`` needs to be created. Here's an example session setting up and using ``easy_install``::

    $ cd PREFIX
    $ mkdir site-packages
    $ curl -sO http://peak.telecommunity.com/dist/ez_setup.py
    $ bin/pypy-c ez_setup.py
    ...
    $ bin/easy_install WebOb
    $ bin/pypy-c           
    Python 2.5.2 (64714, Apr 27 2009, 08:16:13)
    [PyPy 1.1.0] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``PyPy doesn't have copolyvariadic dependently-monomorphed hyperfluxads''
    >>>> import webob
    >>>>               

.. _`py.py interpreter`:

Running the Python Interpreter Without Translation
---------------------------------------------------

The py.py interpreter
+++++++++++++++++++++

To start interpreting Python with PyPy, install a C compiler that is
supported by distutils and use Python 2.4 or greater to run PyPy::

    cd pypy
    python bin/py.py

After a few seconds (remember: this is running on top of CPython), 
you should be at the PyPy prompt, which is the same as the Python 
prompt, but with an extra ">".

Now you are ready to start running Python code.  Most Python
modules should work if they don't involve CPython extension 
modules.  **This is slow, and most C modules are not present by
default even if they are standard!**  Here is an example of
determining PyPy's performance in pystones:: 

    >>>> from test import pystone 
    >>>> pystone.main(10)

The parameter is the number of loops to run through the test. The
default is 50000, which is far too many to run in a non-translated
PyPy version (i.e. when PyPy's interpreter itself is being interpreted 
by CPython).

py.py options
+++++++++++++

To list the PyPy interpreter command line options, type::

    cd pypy
    python bin/py.py --help

py.py supports most of the options that CPython supports too (in addition to a
large amount of options that can be used to customize py.py).
As an example of using PyPy from the command line, you could type::

    python py.py -c "from test import pystone; pystone.main(10)"

Alternatively, as with regular Python, you can simply give a
script name on the command line::

    python py.py ../../lib-python/2.5.2/test/pystone.py 10

See our  `configuration sections`_ for details about what all the commandline
options do.


.. _Mono: http://www.mono-project.com/Main_Page
.. _`CLI backend`: cli-backend.html
.. _`Boehm-Demers-Weiser garbage collector`: http://www.hpl.hp.com/personal/Hans_Boehm/gc/
.. _clr: clr-module.html
.. _`CPythons core language regression tests`: http://codespeak.net:8099/summary?category=applevel&branch=%3Ctrunk%3E

.. include:: _ref.txt
