pypy/doc/windows.rst, before:

===============
PyPy on Windows
===============

Pypy is supported on Windows platforms, starting with Windows 2000.
The following text gives some hints about how to translate the PyPy
interpreter.

To build pypy-c you need a C compiler.  Microsoft Visual Studio is
preferred, but can also use the mingw32 port of gcc.


Translating PyPy with Visual Studio
-----------------------------------

We routinely test the `RPython translation toolchain`_ using 
Visual Studio 2008, Express
Edition.  Other configurations may work as well.

The translation scripts will set up the appropriate environment variables
for the compiler, so you do not need to run vcvars before translation.  
They will attempt to locate the same compiler version that
was used to build the Python interpreter doing the
translation.  Failing that, they will pick the most recent Visual Studio
compiler they can find.  In addition, the target architecture
(32 bits, 64 bits) is automatically selected.  A 32 bit build can only be built
using a 32 bit Python and vice versa. By default pypy is built using the 
Multi-threaded DLL (/MD) runtime environment.

**Note:** PyPy is currently not supported for 64 bit Windows, and translation
will fail in this case.

The compiler is all you need to build pypy-c, but it will miss some
modules that relies on third-party libraries.  See below how to get
and build them.

Preping Windows for the Large Build
-----------------------------------

Normally 32bit programs are limited to 2GB of memory on Windows. It is
possible to raise this limit, to 3GB on Windows 32bit, and almost 4GB
on Windows 64bit.

On Windows 32bit, it is necessary to modify the system: follow
http://usa.autodesk.com/adsk/servlet/ps/dl/item?siteID=123112&id=9583842&linkID=9240617
to enable the "3GB" feature, and reboot. This step is not necessary on
Windows 64bit.

Then you need to execute::

    editbin /largeaddressaware pypy.exe

on the pypy.exe file you compiled.

Installing external packages
----------------------------

On Windows, there is no standard place where to download, build and
install third-party libraries.  We recommend installing them in the parent
directory of the pypy checkout.  For example, if you installed pypy in
``d:\pypy\trunk\`` (This directory contains a README file), the base
directory is ``d:\pypy``. You must then set the
INCLUDE, LIB and PATH (for DLLs) environment variables appropriately.

Abridged method (for -Ojit builds using Visual Studio 2008)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Download the versions of all the external packages
from 
https://bitbucket.org/pypy/pypy/downloads/local.zip
Then expand it into the base directory (base_dir) and modify your environment to reflect this::

    set PATH=<base_dir>\bin;%PATH%
    set INCLUDE=<base_dir>\include;%INCLUDE%
    set LIB=<base_dir>\lib;%LIB%

Now you should be good to go. Read on for more information.

The Boehm garbage collector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This library is needed if you plan to use the ``--gc=boehm`` translation
option (this is the default at some optimization levels like ``-O1``,
but unneeded for high-performance translations like ``-O2``).
You may get it at
http://www.hpl.hp.com/personal/Hans_Boehm/gc/gc_source/gc-7.1.tar.gz

Versions 7.0 and 7.1 are known to work; the 6.x series won't work with
pypy. Unpack this folder in the base directory.  Then open a command
prompt::

    cd gc-7.1
    nmake -f NT_THREADS_MAKEFILE
    copy Release\gc.dll <somewhere in the PATH>

The zlib compression library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download http://www.gzip.org/zlib/zlib-1.2.3.tar.gz and extract it in
the base directory.  Then compile::

    cd zlib-1.2.3
    nmake -f win32\Makefile.msc
    copy zlib1.dll <somewhere in the PATH>\zlib.dll

The bz2 compression library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download http://bzip.org/1.0.5/bzip2-1.0.5.tar.gz and extract it in
the base directory.  Then compile::

    cd bzip2-1.0.5
    nmake -f makefile.msc
    
The expat XML parser
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download the source code of expat on sourceforge:
http://sourceforge.net/projects/expat/ and extract it in the base
directory.  Version 2.1.0 is known to pass tests. Then open the project 
file ``expat.dsw`` with Visual
Studio; follow the instruction for converting the project files,
switch to the "Release" configuration, reconfigure the runtime for 
Multi-threaded DLL (/MD) and build the solution (the ``expat`` project 
is actually enough for pypy).

Then, copy the file ``win32\bin\release\libexpat.dll`` somewhere in
your PATH.

The OpenSSL library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OpenSSL needs a Perl interpreter to configure its makefile.  You may
use the one distributed by ActiveState, or the one from cygwin.  In
both case the perl interpreter must be found on the PATH.

Get http://www.openssl.org/source/openssl-0.9.8k.tar.gz and extract it
in the base directory. Then compile::

    perl Configure VC-WIN32
    ms\do_ms.bat
    nmake -f ms\nt.mak install

Using the mingw compiler
------------------------

You can compile pypy with the mingw compiler, using the --cc=mingw32 option;
gcc.exe must be on the PATH. If the -cc flag does not begin with "ming", it should be
the name of a valid gcc-derivative compiler, i.e. x86_64-w64-mingw32-gcc for the 64 bit
compiler creating a 64 bit target.

You probably want to set the CPATH, LIBRARY_PATH, and PATH environment variable to
the header files, lib or dlls, and dlls respectively of the locally installed packages 
if they are not in the mingw directory heirarchy. 

libffi for the mingw compiler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To enable the _rawffi (and ctypes) module, you need to compile a mingw
version of libffi.  Here is one way to do this, wich should allow you to try
to build for win64 or win32:

#. Download and unzip a `mingw32 build`_ or `mingw64 build`_, say into c:\mingw
#. If you do not use cygwin, you will need msys to provide make, 
   autoconf tools and other goodies.

    #. Download and unzip a `msys for mingw`_, say into c:\msys
    #. Edit the c:\msys\etc\fstab file to mount c:\mingw

#. Download and unzip the `libffi source files`_, and extract
   them in the base directory.  
#. Run c:\msys\msys.bat or a cygwin shell which should make you
   feel better since it is a shell prompt with shell tools.
#. From inside the shell, cd to the libffi directory and do::

    sh ./configure
    make
    cp .libs/libffi-5.dll <somewhere on the PATH>

If you can't find the dll, and the libtool issued a warning about 
"undefined symbols not allowed", you will need to edit the libffi
Makefile in the toplevel directory. Add the flag -no-undefined to
the definition of libffi_la_LDFLAGS

If you wish to experiment with win64, you must run configure with flags::

    sh ./configure --build=x86_64-w64-mingw32 --host=x86_64-w64-mingw32

or such, depending on your mingw64 download.

hacking on Pypy with the mingw compiler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Since hacking on Pypy means running tests, you will need a way to specify
the mingw compiler when hacking (as opposed to translating). As of
March 2012, --cc is not a valid option for pytest.py. However if you set an
environment variable CC to the compliter exe, testing will use it.

.. _'mingw32 build': http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/files/Toolchains%20targetting%20Win32/Automated%20Builds
.. _`mingw64 build`: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/files/Toolchains%20targetting%20Win64/Automated%20Builds
.. _`msys for mingw`: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/files/External%20binary%20packages%20%28Win64%20hosted%29/MSYS%20%2832-bit%29   
.. _`libffi source files`: http://sourceware.org/libffi/
.. _`RPython translation toolchain`: translation.html

Commit message:

add libsqlite3 to build instructions

pypy/doc/windows.rst, after:

===============
PyPy on Windows
===============

Pypy is supported on Windows platforms, starting with Windows 2000.
The following text gives some hints about how to translate the PyPy
interpreter.

To build pypy-c you need a C compiler.  Microsoft Visual Studio is
preferred, but can also use the mingw32 port of gcc.


Translating PyPy with Visual Studio
-----------------------------------

We routinely test the `RPython translation toolchain`_ using 
Visual Studio 2008, Express
Edition.  Other configurations may work as well.

The translation scripts will set up the appropriate environment variables
for the compiler, so you do not need to run vcvars before translation.  
They will attempt to locate the same compiler version that
was used to build the Python interpreter doing the
translation.  Failing that, they will pick the most recent Visual Studio
compiler they can find.  In addition, the target architecture
(32 bits, 64 bits) is automatically selected.  A 32 bit build can only be built
using a 32 bit Python and vice versa. By default pypy is built using the 
Multi-threaded DLL (/MD) runtime environment.

**Note:** PyPy is currently not supported for 64 bit Windows, and translation
will fail in this case.

The compiler is all you need to build pypy-c, but it will miss some
modules that relies on third-party libraries.  See below how to get
and build them.

Preping Windows for the Large Build
-----------------------------------

Normally 32bit programs are limited to 2GB of memory on Windows. It is
possible to raise this limit, to 3GB on Windows 32bit, and almost 4GB
on Windows 64bit.

On Windows 32bit, it is necessary to modify the system: follow
http://usa.autodesk.com/adsk/servlet/ps/dl/item?siteID=123112&id=9583842&linkID=9240617
to enable the "3GB" feature, and reboot. This step is not necessary on
Windows 64bit.

Then you need to execute::

    editbin /largeaddressaware pypy.exe

on the pypy.exe file you compiled.

Installing external packages
----------------------------

On Windows, there is no standard place where to download, build and
install third-party libraries.  We recommend installing them in the parent
directory of the pypy checkout.  For example, if you installed pypy in
``d:\pypy\trunk\`` (This directory contains a README file), the base
directory is ``d:\pypy``. You must then set the
INCLUDE, LIB and PATH (for DLLs) environment variables appropriately.

Abridged method (for -Ojit builds using Visual Studio 2008)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Download the versions of all the external packages
from 
https://bitbucket.org/pypy/pypy/downloads/local.zip
Then expand it into the base directory (base_dir) and modify your environment to reflect this::

    set PATH=<base_dir>\bin;%PATH%
    set INCLUDE=<base_dir>\include;%INCLUDE%
    set LIB=<base_dir>\lib;%LIB%

Now you should be good to go. Read on for more information.

The Boehm garbage collector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This library is needed if you plan to use the ``--gc=boehm`` translation
option (this is the default at some optimization levels like ``-O1``,
but unneeded for high-performance translations like ``-O2``).
You may get it at
http://www.hpl.hp.com/personal/Hans_Boehm/gc/gc_source/gc-7.1.tar.gz

Versions 7.0 and 7.1 are known to work; the 6.x series won't work with
pypy. Unpack this folder in the base directory.  Then open a command
prompt::

    cd gc-7.1
    nmake -f NT_THREADS_MAKEFILE
    copy Release\gc.dll <somewhere in the PATH>

The zlib compression library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download http://www.gzip.org/zlib/zlib-1.2.3.tar.gz and extract it in
the base directory.  Then compile::

    cd zlib-1.2.3
    nmake -f win32\Makefile.msc
    copy zlib1.dll <somewhere in the PATH>\zlib.dll

The bz2 compression library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download http://bzip.org/1.0.5/bzip2-1.0.5.tar.gz and extract it in
the base directory.  Then compile::

    cd bzip2-1.0.5
    nmake -f makefile.msc
    
The sqlite3 database library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download http://www.sqlite.org/2013/sqlite-amalgamation-3071601.zip and extract
it into a directory under the base directory. Also get 
http://www.sqlite.org/2013/sqlite-dll-win32-x86-3071601.zip and extract the dll
into the bin directory, and the sqlite3.def into the sources directory.
Now build the import library so cffi can use the header and dll::
    lib /DEF:sqlite3.def" /OUT:sqlite3.lib"
    copy sqlite3.lib path\to\libs


The expat XML parser
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Download the source code of expat on sourceforge:
http://sourceforge.net/projects/expat/ and extract it in the base
directory.  Version 2.1.0 is known to pass tests. Then open the project 
file ``expat.dsw`` with Visual
Studio; follow the instruction for converting the project files,
switch to the "Release" configuration, reconfigure the runtime for 
Multi-threaded DLL (/MD) and build the solution (the ``expat`` project 
is actually enough for pypy).

Then, copy the file ``win32\bin\release\libexpat.dll`` somewhere in
your PATH.

The OpenSSL library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OpenSSL needs a Perl interpreter to configure its makefile.  You may
use the one distributed by ActiveState, or the one from cygwin.  In
both case the perl interpreter must be found on the PATH.

Get http://www.openssl.org/source/openssl-0.9.8k.tar.gz and extract it
in the base directory. Then compile::

    perl Configure VC-WIN32
    ms\do_ms.bat
    nmake -f ms\nt.mak install

Using the mingw compiler
------------------------

You can compile pypy with the mingw compiler, using the --cc=mingw32 option;
gcc.exe must be on the PATH. If the -cc flag does not begin with "ming", it should be
the name of a valid gcc-derivative compiler, i.e. x86_64-w64-mingw32-gcc for the 64 bit
compiler creating a 64 bit target.

You probably want to set the CPATH, LIBRARY_PATH, and PATH environment variable to
the header files, lib or dlls, and dlls respectively of the locally installed packages 
if they are not in the mingw directory heirarchy. 

libffi for the mingw compiler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To enable the _rawffi (and ctypes) module, you need to compile a mingw
version of libffi.  Here is one way to do this, wich should allow you to try
to build for win64 or win32:

#. Download and unzip a `mingw32 build`_ or `mingw64 build`_, say into c:\mingw
#. If you do not use cygwin, you will need msys to provide make, 
   autoconf tools and other goodies.

    #. Download and unzip a `msys for mingw`_, say into c:\msys
    #. Edit the c:\msys\etc\fstab file to mount c:\mingw

#. Download and unzip the `libffi source files`_, and extract
   them in the base directory.  
#. Run c:\msys\msys.bat or a cygwin shell which should make you
   feel better since it is a shell prompt with shell tools.
#. From inside the shell, cd to the libffi directory and do::

    sh ./configure
    make
    cp .libs/libffi-5.dll <somewhere on the PATH>

If you can't find the dll, and the libtool issued a warning about 
"undefined symbols not allowed", you will need to edit the libffi
Makefile in the toplevel directory. Add the flag -no-undefined to
the definition of libffi_la_LDFLAGS

If you wish to experiment with win64, you must run configure with flags::

    sh ./configure --build=x86_64-w64-mingw32 --host=x86_64-w64-mingw32

or such, depending on your mingw64 download.

hacking on Pypy with the mingw compiler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Since hacking on Pypy means running tests, you will need a way to specify
the mingw compiler when hacking (as opposed to translating). As of
March 2012, --cc is not a valid option for pytest.py. However if you set an
environment variable CC to the compliter exe, testing will use it.

.. _'mingw32 build': http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/files/Toolchains%20targetting%20Win32/Automated%20Builds
.. _`mingw64 build`: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/files/Toolchains%20targetting%20Win64/Automated%20Builds
.. _`msys for mingw`: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/files/External%20binary%20packages%20%28Win64%20hosted%29/MSYS%20%2832-bit%29   
.. _`libffi source files`: http://sourceware.org/libffi/
.. _`RPython translation toolchain`: translation.html
